Control of Air: Future Regional Dynamics
Air Marshal (Dr) Diptendu Choudhury (Retd) PVSM, AVSM, VM, VSM

'The IAF achieved total air superiority in the eastern sector within a day, and in less than three days in the western sector during the 1971 war, and the effect in enabling the surface forces to operate to their full potential was remarkable'.
                                                                               Air Cmde Jasjit Singh, "Defence from the Skies"
                          

1. The journey of manned flight completed a hundred and twenty-two years on December 17th, 2025, and it marked humankind's long and enduring tryst with the invisible aerial domain. The successive World Wars firmly established air power as a unique military instrument of power that enabled warfare to be prosecuted from the vertical dimension, unimpeded by the challenges of terrain friction, geography and physical barriers faced by land and sea powers. Technology and innovation have underpinned the swift and increasing capabilities of air power over years and has been historically responsible for the former's transformational and adaptive nature. While swift technology has driven changes in aerial platforms, weapons and capabilities which in turn have shaped air power characteristics, concepts, and premises of employment, one factor has consistently remained a constant reality, and that is control of air. 


2. The prescient thoughts of Guilio Douhet, an Italian Artillery officer in the early twentieth century, stands out on how the advent of airpower would change modern warfare. He foresaw that the development of the airplane would make 'command of the air' a primary objective in any campaign, and the ultimate enabler of victory in war. He argued that air power had altered the character of war since there were no geographical boundaries in the air, and airplanes could go everywhere to deliver weapons on any surface target. According to him, "The command of the air provides whoever possesses it with the advantages of protecting all his own land and sea territory from enemy aerial offensives and at the same time of subjecting the enemy's territory to his own offensives". 

Russian Il-78M FRAs aerial refueling, Source: dtnext.in

3. This premise has stood the test of time as it established a fundamental truth, that command or control of the vertical domain over land and sea directly impacts the military instrument on the surface domains and therefore remains relevant in contemporary and future conflicts. This is amply evident in the way China has sought to exploit control of the aerial dimension in the recent years to seek greater control of the maritime spaces and the skies above in the East and South China Seas (SCS) allowing it to dominate Taiwan. In the Indian context, control of air by the Indian Air Force (IAF) in both Eastern and Western fronts in the 1971 played a significant role in the war outcomes. The more recent conflict with Pakistan in Operation Sindoor has once again underscored its enduring role in India's national security after a hiatus of over half a century as control of air is vital from both defensive and offensive perspectives. It enables the defence of a nation's sovereign airspace while denying the enemy air power's ability to attack one's military, as well as civilian assets and infrastructure. From an offensive perspective, control of the air over the enemy's airspace allows the air power of a nation to attack the adversary deep inside his territory to strike military and strategic assets while simultaneously and actively supporting own surface military operations. 

 Contemporary Conflicts

4. Recent conflicts of the ongoing Russo-Ukraine war, the Gaza Conflict, the Israel-US airstrike on Iran's nuclear facilities, and even China's current strategy of coercive military posturing over Taiwan, underscore the salience of control of air in different ways. The Russian military, like in the erstwhile Soviet days, even today considers combat aircraft as airborne artillery: inflexible vehicles for the delivery of massive firepower and extensions of the ground forces. Therefore, its military doctrine does not require the Russian Aerospace Force or the VKS to control large swathes of airspace to enable its operations or for the pursuit of surface campaign goals. Western experts echo this view, as exemplified by the observations of Phillips Payson O'Brien and Edward Stringer, "Instead of working to control the skies, Russia's air force has mostly provided air support to ground troops or bombed Ukrainian cities. In this, it has followed the traditional tactics of a continental power that privileges land forces. Focusing on ground troops can work if you have almost endless numbers of soldiers and are prepared to lose them. But so wedded is Russia to its history of successes on the ground that it fails to understand the importance of airpower." 

5. The VKS could have played a much more effective role and incurred lesser attrition if it had concentrated on controlling the Ukrainian airspace in the opening days of the war. Had it pursued a robust and resolute suppression of air defence (SEAD) campaign alongside a dedicated counter-air targeting against the much smaller Ukrainian Air Force or the PSU, Russia could have enabled total air superiority over Ukraine. Thus, with total control of the air the VKS then could have conducted deep air strikes with greater effectiveness and lethality, and most importantly supported their ground offensives aggressively. Allowing the Ukrainian AD to survive not only led to significant losses of the VKS fighters and helicopters, but it also enabled the PSU to dynamically exploit its AD assets with NATO assistance, to deny the Russian air power the freedom to operate freely. The Russians on the other hand retained a firm control of their own airspace. The US thinktank RAND corporation assessed, "Russia has positioned advanced ground-based air defences in parts of Ukraine it occupies. They increase risks to Ukrainian aircraft flying over Russian-controlled territory. So, to support ground force operations Ukraine needs to suppress or destroy Russian air defences." But the small PSU having suffered unacceptable losses became ineffective from the early months of the war and was in no position to control the air over Russian territory. The supply of F-16 fighters to revive the PSU has been too little too late, compelling the innovative Ukrainian military to rely exclusively on drones to carry out its limited and yet spectacular attacks inside Russian territory. Control of air or the inability of both sides to exploit it has led to the attritional war dragging on for almost three years.

6. In stark contrast, employment of offensive air power for national security has been the preferred strategy of Israel since the sixties. For Israel, control of the skies over its adversaries has enabled it to defeat larger militaries. It has also allowed it to fight against military arms of terrorist organisations like the Hezbollah in Lebanon and Hamas in Gaza. The air strikes in Gaza by the Israeli Air Force in the recent conflict are a continuation of its long-pursued national response strategy. Total control of the skies has ensured full freedom of offensive air operations, supported by aerial assets needed for such missions which include surveillance, reconnaissance, electronic warfare assets, and airborne early warning, command and control systems. Control of air emerged as a crucial factor when Iran with its Air Force (AF) weakened by years of Western sanctions, was incapable of defending itself against the recent Israeli and US air strikes on its nuclear capability. Its AD force which comes under the Iranian Army, failed to defend itself from conventional air strikes. Without a doubt, the absence of a strong AF and relying solely on its AD has cost Iran dearly, as it could not prevent Israel and the US wresting control of its airspace to achieve their objectives.

7. The swift technology leveraged transformation of China's PLA Air Force (PLAAF), and its ever-increasing contemporary exploitation reflects Beijing's sophisticated understanding of the salience of the vertical dimension. The rapid modernization of PLAAF was a consequence of its close study of the air power employment in the Gulf War. Since 2004, the PLAAF adopted a service-specific strategic concept of offensive and defensive operations that integrate air and space, with the Chinese leadership having endorsed it as a strategic Air Force. In 2014, Xi Jinping, emphasised the need to "accelerate the construction of a powerful people's Air Force that integrates air and space". His reference to the PLAAF as a "strategic service" capable of "playing a decisive role" in "the overall situation of national security and military strategy" underscores the importance that the Chinese military gives to the imperative of controlling the air.

Indian Air Force Sukhoi Su-30MKI
Source: the national  interest



8. China's increasingly aggressive use of air power to coerce Taiwan and bolster its Anti-Area-Access-Denial (A2AD) strategy to defend its mainland from the threat posed by the US carrier battle groups, is underpinned by the critical necessity of controlling of air over its maritime spaces. It has expanded its presence and infrastructure across at least seven reefs and artificial islands in the Spratly Islands. Notably, Subi, Fiery Cross, and Mischief Reefs now feature airfields capable of supporting fighter operations, enabling the deployment of a variety of aircraft such as fighters, bombers, maritime reconnaissance aircraft, airborne early warning and control (AEWC) aircraft, tanker aircraft, and advanced surface-to-air missile (SAM) systems. This enhances the PLAAF's ability to project power over both aerial and maritime spaces in the SCS and beyond, facilitating a wider control of the airspace. The rate of air power infrastructure development in Tibet, where the Indian Air Force (IAF) still enjoys an asymmetric air power advantage, albeit not for long, reiterates China's future approach towards the role control of air will play in any future conflict with India.

The Future Indian Context 

9. The ninety-hour offensive use of air power, where the India's long-range standoff targeting capability created decisive effects with the extensive destruction of Pakistan AF (PAF) aircraft on ground and in the air, airfields, AD radars, SAM systems, airfield infrastructure, command and control (C2) centers, maintenance facilities, unmanned aerial systems, and other military assets. It is this unacceptable damage to the PAF which forced Pakistan to seek a ceasefire. The IAF's S 400 SAM system with its long range kill envelope pushed the PAF to the safety of their depth bases and prevented them for getting airborne for AD missions to safeguard their own territory. This also meant that the PAF could not undertake any offensive missions against the IAF and had to fall back on to the sub-optimal option of using drones and missiles which proved ineffective, whereas the IAF's stand-off weapons wreaked extensive destruction. The air dominance over Pakistan's heartland and its airspace was possible because of the conceptually offensive employment of air power which synergized the long-range AD and stand-off precision targeting capability of the IAF. Despite its rhetoric and posturing, Pakistan has realized the weaknesses of its much-touted Chinese assisted integrated AD capability and has also been harshly reminded the limits of its offensive air power. It is already seeking to fill the gaps and reduce the combat capability differential with the IAF with active assistance from China and Turkey, while also managing to revive US assistance to fill the losses in aircraft, assets and C2 facilities.

10. In the starkly different high altitude mountainous Himalayan terrain, the control of air becomes even more critical against China. In the past, the swift and extensive activation of offensive air power during the 2020 Ladakh crisis, intended to support the full spectrum of operations in a potential high-altitude conflict, demonstrating India's capability for asymmetric deterrence through its offensive air power. As per security studies experts, O'Donnell and Bolfrass, 'PLA's strategic options were constrained by IAF's asymmetric advantage over the PLAAF.' It is acutely aware of the limitations of its offensive air power capability in Tibet which it has sought to compensate with its Rocket Force deployment against India till now. 

11. Beijing too has closely monitored the outcomes of Op Sindoor and is engaging proactively with Islamabad with its once relatively covert air power collusion of decades now out in the open. It is a win-win situation for both as Pakistan benefits from the continued supply of air power technology, fifth generation platforms, weapon systems, space-based intelligence, and surveillance reconnaissance support and inclusion in future tech development. China too benefits from Pakistan's combat experience, insight into IAF concepts of operations and tactics, extensive joint training opportunities and lays the grounds for operational interoperability given the commonality of platforms and weapon systems. Of equal concern for India is the high possibility of collusive air power employment in a conflict with China, where the PAF can be expected to willingly participate, especially since in any future multi-domain operations the control of air will define the outcomes.

Dassault Rafale, Source: Dassault Aviation
End Thoughts

12. The revival of the importance of air power in India's national security matrix could not have been timelier. Op Sindoor has brought back the centrality of control of air not only in the nation's contemporary military strategy but has also unequivocally brought to the centerstage its place in all future multi-domain operations. Given that both India's adversaries have strong Air Forces which are well integrated in their respective national security and military strategies control of the vertical dimensions will be a heavily contested affair. The sheer extent of borders India shares with its adversaries and given the IAF's diminishing bench strength of combat squadrons, bolstering air power is not just an Air Force requirement but a national security imperative. The ability to control the aerial dimension, whether for extended periods for sustained warfighting or for short intervals in short swift operations, is a vital element of the nation's conventional deterrence capability. It must therefore be given the importance it deserves in the nation's security and military strategy, and the asymmetric advantage the IAF brings with its war-fighting capability must be supplemented equally with the necessary capacity on priority that it deserves.   








